ASSIGNMENT: COMPARISON OF LINEAR SEARCH AND BINARY SEARCH

1. AIM

To experimentally compare Linear Search and Binary Search by measuring the number of element comparisons performed for different array sizes and different numbers of searches. The experiment also considers the one-time sorting cost required before Binary Search.

2. PROBLEM STATEMENT

Create a random array of size n and perform m searches on the array, where the element to be searched is also determined randomly. Calculate the number of comparisons made by the searching function.

The value of m is varied as:
m = 1, 1000, 5000, 8000, 10000

The experiment is performed for:
n = 1000, 5000, 10000

For Binary Search, the array is sorted before searching. The number of comparisons made by the sorting algorithm is counted and included only once. The experiment is repeated 1000 times for every (n, m) pair, and the average number of comparisons is calculated.

Three graphs are plotted, one for each value of n, with m on the x-axis and average number of comparisons on the y-axis. Linear Search and Binary Search are plotted on the same graph.

3. INTRODUCTION

Searching is the process of finding a particular element, called the target, in a collection of elements. The efficiency of a searching algorithm can be evaluated by examining how many comparisons it performs.

Two searching techniques considered in this experiment are Linear Search and Binary Search.

Linear Search examines the elements sequentially until the target is found or the complete array has been checked. It does not require the array to be sorted.

Binary Search works by repeatedly dividing a sorted search space into two parts. It compares the target with the middle element and eliminates the half that cannot contain the target.

The purpose of this experiment is to observe the practical difference between these two approaches by varying both the size of the array and the number of searches performed.

4. LINEAR SEARCH

4.1 Definition

Linear Search checks the elements of an array one by one from the beginning. If an element matches the target, the search terminates successfully. If the complete array is examined without finding the target, the search terminates unsuccessfully.

Example:

Array:
[15, 7, 23, 41, 9]

Searching for 41 requires 4 element comparisons.

4.2 Algorithm

LinearSearch(A, target)

1. Start from the first element of A.
2. Compare the current element with target.
3. If the elements are equal, return that the target was found.
4. Otherwise, move to the next element.
5. Repeat until the target is found or the array ends.
6. If the array ends, return that the target was not found.

4.3 Complexity

Best case: O(1)
Average case: O(n)
Worst case: O(n)

Linear Search does not require the array to be sorted.

5. BINARY SEARCH

5.1 Definition

Binary Search operates on a sorted array. It compares the target with the middle element of the current search interval.

If the target is equal to the middle element, the search is successful.

If the target is smaller than the middle element, the right half is discarded.

If the target is larger than the middle element, the left half is discarded.

The process continues until the target is found or the search interval becomes empty.

5.2 Algorithm

BinarySearch(A, target)

1. Set low = 0 and high = n - 1.
2. While low <= high:
   a. Calculate mid = (low + high) / 2.
   b. Compare A[mid] with target.
   c. If A[mid] == target, return that the target was found.
   d. If target < A[mid], set high = mid - 1.
   e. Otherwise, set low = mid + 1.
3. If low becomes greater than high, return that the target was not found.

5.3 Complexity

Best case: O(1)
Average case: O(log n)
Worst case: O(log n)

Binary Search is more efficient for repeated searches, but it requires sorted data.

6. WHY DOES BINARY SEARCH REQUIRE A SORTED ARRAY?

Binary Search depends on the ordering of the array.

For example:

[10, 20, 30, 40, 50]

If the middle element is 30 and the target is 50, we know that the target must be to the right of 30. Therefore, all elements to the left of 30 can be discarded.

This decision is possible only because the elements are sorted.

For an unsorted array such as:

[40, 10, 50, 20, 30]

knowing that the middle element is 50 does not tell us which side contains a smaller target. Therefore, half of the array cannot safely be discarded.

Hence, Binary Search cannot be correctly applied directly to an unsorted array.

7. SORTING ALGORITHM USED

Merge Sort is used to sort the random array before Binary Search.

Merge Sort follows a divide-and-conquer approach. The array is divided into smaller subarrays, the subarrays are sorted recursively, and the sorted subarrays are merged.

The time complexity of Merge Sort is O(n log n).

The comparison made between two elements during the merge operation is counted as one sorting comparison.

The sorting operation is performed only once for each experiment because the same sorted array can then be reused for all m Binary Searches.

8. COMPARISON COUNTING

The experiment measures element comparisons rather than every operation performed by the program.

For Linear Search, a statement such as:

if element == target

represents an element comparison.

For Binary Search, comparisons between the middle array element and the target are counted according to the comparison-counting convention used in the implementation.

Calculating the middle index, assigning variables, incrementing counters, and other arithmetic operations are not counted as element comparisons.

For Merge Sort, a comparison such as:

if left[i] <= right[j]

is counted as one comparison between two array elements.

9. TOTAL COMPARISONS

For Linear Search:

C_linear = C1 + C2 + ... + Cm

where Ci is the number of comparisons made by the ith Linear Search.

For Binary Search:

C_binary = C_sort + C1 + C2 + ... + Cm

where C_sort is the number of comparisons made by Merge Sort.

The sorting cost is not added separately for every Binary Search because the array is sorted only once.

10. EXPERIMENTAL METHODOLOGY

Array sizes:
n = 1000, 5000, 10000

Number of searches:
m = 1, 1000, 5000, 8000, 10000

For each combination of n and m:

1. Generate a random array of size n.
2. Perform m random searches using Linear Search and count the element comparisons.
3. Sort the array once using Merge Sort for the Binary Search experiment.
4. Count the comparisons performed by Merge Sort.
5. Perform m Binary Searches on the sorted array and count their comparisons.
6. Add the one-time sorting comparisons to the Binary Search comparisons.
7. Repeat the complete experiment 1000 times.
8. Calculate the average number of comparisons.
9. Store the average result for the corresponding n and m values.

There are 3 x 5 = 15 different (n, m) combinations. Each combination is repeated 1000 times.

11. WHY IS THE EXPERIMENT REPEATED 1000 TIMES?

The array and search elements are generated randomly. Consequently, the number of comparisons can differ between individual experiments.

For example, a Linear Search may find a target near the beginning of an array in one experiment and near the end in another experiment.

Repeating the experiment 1000 times and calculating the average reduces the effect of individual random cases and provides a more representative measurement.

Average comparisons = Total comparisons over 1000 experiments / 1000

12. WHY ARE DIFFERENT ARRAY SIZES USED?

The three array sizes allow the effect of input size to be observed.

Linear Search has O(n) average and worst-case complexity, so its search cost increases approximately in proportion to the size of the array.

Binary Search has O(log n) search complexity, so its search cost increases much more slowly as n increases.

13. WHY ARE DIFFERENT VALUES OF m USED?

m represents the number of searches performed on the same data.

This is particularly important for Binary Search because Binary Search requires an initial sorting operation.

For a single search, sorting the entire array may introduce a large overhead compared with simply performing Linear Search.

For many searches, the one-time sorting cost can be distributed across a large number of searches. Increasing m therefore allows the effect of the initial sorting cost to be observed.

14. WHY IS SORTING DONE ONLY ONCE FOR BINARY SEARCH?

The same sorted array can be reused for all m searches.

The process is:

Random Array -> Sort Once -> Perform m Binary Searches

Sorting the array before every search would repeatedly introduce an O(n log n) preprocessing cost and would not represent the intended use of a reusable sorted dataset.

15. WHY IS THE ARRAY NOT SORTED FOR LINEAR SEARCH?

Linear Search does not require sorted data. It can search directly through the original random array.

Sorting the array before Linear Search would add preprocessing work without providing the main advantage that Binary Search obtains from sorted ordering.

Therefore:

Linear Search:
Random Array -> Search

Binary Search:
Random Array -> Sort -> Search

16. EXPECTED BEHAVIOUR

For Linear Search, the number of comparisons is expected to increase approximately linearly as m increases because every additional search requires another traversal of the array on average.

For Binary Search, the number of comparisons per search is much smaller because the search interval is repeatedly divided into two parts.

However, Binary Search has an initial sorting cost. Consequently, for very small m, Linear Search may have fewer total comparisons.

As m becomes large, the one-time sorting cost becomes relatively less significant and Binary Search is expected to require fewer total comparisons than Linear Search.

17. RESULTS

The actual results obtained from the program should be inserted in the following tables.

17.1 Results for n = 1000

m              Linear Search              Binary Search + Sorting
1              [insert result]            [insert result]
1000           [insert result]            [insert result]
5000           [insert result]            [insert result]
8000           [insert result]            [insert result]
10000          [insert result]            [insert result]

17.2 Results for n = 5000

m              Linear Search              Binary Search + Sorting
1              [insert result]            [insert result]
1000           [insert result]            [insert result]
5000           [insert result]            [insert result]
8000           [insert result]            [insert result]
10000          [insert result]            [insert result]

17.3 Results for n = 10000

m              Linear Search              Binary Search + Sorting
1              [insert result]            [insert result]
1000           [insert result]            [insert result]
5000           [insert result]            [insert result]
8000           [insert result]            [insert result]
10000          [insert result]            [insert result]

18. GRAPHS

Three graphs are required.

Graph 1:
Title: Linear Search vs Binary Search for n = 1000
X-axis: Number of Searches (m)
Y-axis: Average Number of Comparisons

Graph 2:
Title: Linear Search vs Binary Search for n = 5000
X-axis: Number of Searches (m)
Y-axis: Average Number of Comparisons

Graph 3:
Title: Linear Search vs Binary Search for n = 10000
X-axis: Number of Searches (m)
Y-axis: Average Number of Comparisons

Each graph should contain two curves:
1. Linear Search
2. Binary Search + Sorting

The graphs generated by the Python program should be inserted in this section.

19. ANALYSIS

The experimental results should be analyzed by comparing the two curves for each value of n.

Linear Search generally shows a much steeper increase in total comparisons as m increases. This occurs because every additional search can require examination of a large portion of the array.

Binary Search requires considerably fewer comparisons per search because each comparison approximately halves the remaining search space.

However, Binary Search has an initial sorting cost. This cost is significant when the number of searches is small. As m increases, the same sorting cost is spread over more searches, making Binary Search increasingly advantageous.

The effect of array size should also be visible in the results. As n increases, Linear Search requires more comparisons because its search complexity depends directly on n. Binary Search grows much more slowly with n because its search complexity is logarithmic.

The exact numerical observations should be stated using the measured values obtained from the experiment.

20. CONCLUSION

The experiment demonstrates the practical difference between Linear Search and Binary Search.

Linear Search is simple and does not require sorted data, but its number of comparisons increases approximately linearly with the size of the array and the number of searches.

Binary Search requires sorted data and therefore has an initial sorting cost. However, once the array has been sorted, each search requires significantly fewer comparisons because the search space is repeatedly divided into two halves.

The experiment also demonstrates the importance of the number of searches. For a small number of searches, the sorting overhead of Binary Search may not be worthwhile. For a large number of searches on the same data, the one-time sorting cost becomes relatively less significant and Binary Search becomes more efficient in terms of total comparisons.

Thus, the choice between Linear Search and Binary Search depends on whether the data is already sorted, the size of the dataset, and the number of searches that need to be performed.
